CHI 2013 Papers and Notes (Refereed)

Reviews of submission #1741: "EchoTree: Engaged Conversation when
Capabilities are Limited"

------------------------ Submission 1741, Review 5 ------------------------

Reviewer:           primary

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI


Overall Rating

   3.0 - Neutral: Overall I would not argue for accepting or rejecting this paper. 

Review


Expertise

   

The Meta-Review

   This meta review is based on the three reviews provided for this
   submission and the long discussion carried out between the reviewers on
   differences in their reviews. 

   This note is about an assistive visualization tool that could improve the
   communication production (textual and spoken) of impaired users, through
   the use of a tree-based navigation of word suggestions. This can also be
   used to create an online game of storytelling.

   All reviewers agree that this note should be rated as between possibly
   reject and neutral for several reasons. The idea is interesting, but it
   is not entirely novel with respect of the authors' claim that
   interlocutors have a hard time deciding if the other person is still
   typing or has gone silent (R1). R1 expects authors to elaborate the
   feature of "helping" users with word selections. It is a distraction to
   focus on the architecture and implementation of the system (R1). The note
   is promising and could be developed from its work-in-progress-stage to a
   more finished note or paper (R1). R2 loves the subject and finds the
   presented technique clever and effective as well as the innovation
   clever. Though R2 wants to know more about its interface and the
   consideration of human factor in the HCI of the system. R3, on the other
   hand, is disappointed because the note does not deliver what it promises.
   A rigorous user study is needed to prove the concept and evaluate the
   system (R3). R4 finds a lot of things to improve in the note: the format,
   the presentation, the structure, the description of the UI, the analysis
   and discussion, the justification of the choice of ENRON Corpus, the
   impact of the system on the conversation. 

   All reviewers suggest several points for improvement in their reviews. I
   will suggest that authors should consider these remarks and state in
   their rebuttal how they feel about modifying their note according to
   these suggestions and whether they are ready to adapt the note in that
   direction as implicated in this review.

Associate Chairs Additional Comments 


The Review


Areas for Improvement



------------------------ Submission 1741, Review 1 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This paper presents an assistive visualization tool that could improve
   the communication production (textual and spoken) of impaired users,
   through the use of a tree-based navigation of word suggestions. A novel
   feature of this system is the ability of interlocutors to "help" impaired
   users with the word choices by anticipating word paths in the sentences
   that are being constructed.

Overall Rating

   2.5 . . . Between possibly reject and neutral 

Review

   The authors present an interesting idea, that of an assistive
   visualization tool that could improve the communication between impaired
   users and others. While there are several word prediction systems that
   help users select the next word when composing sentences, the presented
   system allows both its users and their interlocutors to make that
   selection. 

   The system is not entirely novel with respect ot the authors' claim that
   interlocutors have a hard time deciding if the other person is still
   typing or has gone silent -- the early generation of chat clients allowed
   users to see the interlocutor typing character-by-character. Perhaps the
   authors could have included these for a comparison. Also, there are
   several word prediction systems (some mentioned in the lit review, which
   is strangely included only at the end of the paper). So the main novelty
   that I found is the fact that interlocutors can "help" users with word
   selections. Unfortunately, the authors seems to avoid elaborating or
   emphasizing this feature, which was rather disappointing.

   The authors focus significantly on the architecture and implementation of
   the system, which in my view distracts from the main point of the paper,
   that of allowing better conversations for differently-abled users. And
   unfortunately, it seems that some aspects of the implementation led to a
   somewhat unsatisfactory evaluation, such as:
    - the choice of the training corpus,
    - the display of only a limited part of the search tree, and
    - the rigid prediction mechanism without human override capabilities or
   a human-in-the-loop approach (e.g. a fall-back mechanism that would allow
   users to easily select words not suggested by the prediction engine).
   As a consequence of these, I found the results presented at the end to be
   quite predictable.

   I think this work is promising, but I can't fully recommend it being
   accepted at CHI due to its work-in-progress feel. However, I would
   encourage the authors to continue their work and focus more on the
   conversation / collaborative aspects of their system.

Expertise

   4  (Expert )

Areas for Improvement

   Beside addressing the main points of this review, there are several other
   aspects that could make this paper a much stronger candidate:
    - It is not clear if the system was tested with only one user or more.
    - The story-telling game used as evaluation is not clearly described,
   and I had a hard time understanding how the evaluation was conducted
   using this game. One of the important details is who were the subjects
   used in the evaluation.
    - It is not clear how is the refresh for when trees are redrawn, and if
   the refresh has any affect on user experience.
    - The choice of highlighting words in the trees by changing their colour
   to blue seems less accessible than other options.
    - It is not clear if the system allows some form of "backspace"
   functionality, such as deleting only one word instead of "starting over"
    - The experiment was focused on measuring conversation acceleration
   through word prediction, although in my view the more interesting aspect
   would have been to determine how useful the exposure of "intent" was, and
   particularly how it affected the engagement of interlocutors.


------------------------ Submission 1741, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   The paper describes a new and unique method for aiding severely motor and
   speech disabled individuals in communicating with others.  It does so by
   creating a tree of potential words that the speaker might mean that are
   shared with the listener.  The listener can interact with this tree
   suggesting the intended word.  The suggested words are those with the
   highest frequency of being following words.  

   The paper, thus, contributes to the field of Human Computer Interaction
   by suggesting a new computer-supported technique that helps a disabled
   individual communicate more quickly.  The authors also describe the
   possibility of using their technique to create an online game of
   storytelling.

Overall Rating

   3.0 - Neutral: Overall I would not argue for accepting or rejecting this paper. 

Review

   The paper presents a clever and effective technique for speeding up
   conversation for motor and speech disabled individuals.  It might prove
   to be quite useful  However, the paper only describes the technique and
   evaluates how well it works against a corpus of data collected from an
   email source.  What we don't know about the interface is:

   1. How easy it will be for hypothetical Henry to use.
   2. What "Henry" thinks of the interface.
   3. How potential communicators react to the interface and to
   communicating with "Henry" via this mechanism.
   4. How easy it will be for random communicators to walk up and use the
   system.
   5. How fast and readily a conversation will flow via the Echotree
   interface.

   The innovation is clever, but the authors have left out the "human" part
   of human-computer interaction.  They have neither observed a typical
   "Henry" communicating with existing technology nor collected any data
   from users on the viability of the innovation.  That said, this reviewer
   rated this paper high based on the quality and creativity of the idea. 
   Rather than being just designed for "Henry,"  it is suggested that the
   designers of Echotree look to developing it for individuals with aphasia.
    This is a much larger group of afflicted people. The recognition memory
   of suggested words / pictures might help them communicate much more
   effectively.  Current pictionary based reference systems are too
   cumbersome and rarely used by this group of people.

   There are typos and some ambiguities in the text that could use fixing.
   Words that can be searched for and fixed in the document are:

   (1) pysically 
   (2) i.e. selected - needs a comma after i.e.
   (3)The inspiration might for example - for example needs commas before
   and after
   (4)Brower 3
   (5)4.2$ - should be 4.2 %
   (6)conversational intention - conversational intent
   (7)literal - should be actual (found in two places)
   (8)accessible to - usable by both

   Other composition issues in the paper are:

   (1) The term affordances is misused.  The authors can look up its true
   meaning.  In the meantime, replacing "interaction affordances" with
   "interactivity" will solve the problem.

   (2) This reviewer has no idea what "Inexpensive USB based options are
   available refers to."  It probably does not need to be mentioned.

   (3) The phrase "Coloration shows the contribution of out-OfSeq to the
   overall result."  needs to be rewritten so that it is not so hard to
   parse by the reader.  


Expertise

   4  (Expert )

Areas for Improvement

   The key element that could be improved in the paper's presentation is
   item 1: statements or passages need to be expressed more clearly.


------------------------ Submission 1741, Review 3 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   EchoTree presents a communication system for speech and dexterity
   impaired individuals that works on two fronts. First, it uses word
   prediction through bi-word distribution from large text corpora. Second,
   it engages the inter-communicator in the prediction process, allowing the
   other person to suggest options based on intuition of where the message
   is going. The paper does not present a rigorous validation of the design.

Overall Rating

   2.0 - Possibly Reject: The submission is weak and probably shouldn't be accepted, but there is some chance it should get in. 

Review

   EchoTree presents an interesting premise, but fails to deliver. The
   premise is a mixed-initiative computing system that helps individuals
   with speech and motor dexterity problems to communicate with
   able-individuals. The core of the system is a mixed-initiative,
   multi-user rapid prediction system based on human intuition,
   communication principles, and from statistical analysis of bi-word
   engrams in large text corpora. It sound very promising. On the other
   hand, I did not find evidence of the validity of this approach through a
   rigorous user study. At this point, I consider it a very promising idea
   that needs significant validation through evaluation.

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

Areas for Improvement

   Please, validate claims of usability through rigorous user studies, even
   if the number of participants is low. For this task, please combine
   quantitative and qualitative analysis. The work is very promising, but
   requires validates.


------------------------ Submission 1741, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   The paper describes an innovative method for speeding up communication
   where motor and/or speech impaired people are involved. The main
   innovation appears to be the use of word-trees which are not only to be
   used by the disabled person him/herself but also by the conversation
   parters who will be able to monitor the direction the conversation takes
   and are thus enabled to speed-up by intelligent guesses.

Overall Rating

   3.5 . . . Between neutral and possibly accept 

Review

   The paper is well written and communicates the idea in a proper way.
   Improvements, however, should be done in the following ways:

   (The score is given provided that the suggested improvements will be
   done)

   a) Screenshot diagrams are not legible, too small font used. Enlarge the
   images or show just a part of it.

   b) The state-of-the-art in increasing communication speed for disabled
   persons is given very late in the paper and without sufficient depth.
   Benchmarks for text-prediction, word-prediction, scanning optimising, use
   of phrase catalogues or Semantic Compaction (Word Strategy) is missing.
   So, the benefits of the new approach by using Echo-Trees are not shown.

   c) As HCI and thus the user interface is topic of the conference the
   design of the interface should be planned and described more carefully.
   The use of tiny radio buttons or relatively long selection lists on the
   screen will not easily be accessible fpr people using a head-pointer or
   those relying on a scanning (single switch) input method. This should be
   discussed in be improved.

   d) The benefits of the method is described in correctly predicted next
   words (or words which could follow later in the sentence). The gain in
   time in not analysed and discussed. It is well known, that more or less
   all prediction methods include some factor where part of the time gain is
   lost.

   e) The use of the ENRON Corpus for general every-day conversation is
   doubtful. What is the justification for this choice?

   f) High level word prediction has the disadvantage that the disabled
   person is nudged to use suggested words even if they are not the first
   choice. This will bring an unfavourable bias into the conversation which
   could (if the system is not adaptive or self-learning in itself) lead to
   an adaptation of the user to the system.

Expertise

   4  (Expert )

Areas for Improvement

   see above



